Hello. I'm Jay, and in this lesson,
we'll look at clustering methods beyond K-means.
Now that you know K-means,
you have an understanding of one powerful way to explore data that
can help you extract some patterns out of almost any data set.
K-means is not without its downsides, however.
K-means is great for cases like this,
especially if you know the number of clusters beforehand.
So let me ask you this,
if I asked you to find three clusters in this dataset,
can you do it using only intuition?
I'm sure you can, and K-means can as well.
But what about a data set like this?
If we were looking for three clusters in this dataset,
specifically these three clusters,
do you think K-means would be able to find them?
K-means wouldn't actually be able to carve out these three clusters successfully.
This is a side effect of relying on distance to
centroid as a definition of a cluster in K-means.
This leads K-means to always try to find clusters that are
circular or spherical or hyper-spherical in higher dimensions.
This is an example dataset used to compare clustering algorithms.
It's called a two-crescent dataset.
You can probably guess if K-means would be able to find
the two clusters we need to find here,
each in the shape of a crescent.
And true enough, K-means would not be able to carve out these two shapes.
This is, again, the spherical and hyper-spherical nature of K-means.
Depending on the scenario, however,
K-means can do a good job with
a larger number of clusters if that's what we were looking for.
But it's not in this case because we were trying to
carve out the two clusters specifically.
We'll be using a number of data sets to compare
the various clustering methods that we'll be looking
at throughout this lesson and comparing them with K-means.
One of them is this sort of random distribution, sort of uniform,
and K-means clusters it like this,
which kind of makes sense,
like, how would you find what three clusters exist in this shape?
So, intuitively, it's a little bit hard,
so K-means' answer is plausible, I would say.
We looked at the two crescent dataset.
This is how K-means clusters it.
Another one is called the two rings dataset.
So, here, the purpose is to find two clusters.
One of them is the central ring and the outer ring is the other one.
And, hopefully, you know by now that K-means is not
able to find clusters in those shapes.
This is another dataset where there's a little bit of density here and density here,
and the challenge here for K-means is to find three clusters.
And when we set K to 3,
it does a reasonable job,
I would say, in carving them out.
We looked at this one and we also looked at this one,
where K-means does a really good job of segmenting it into clusters.
So we'll be using these datasets to compare
the other clustering methods that we'll
introduce to supplement what K-means can and cannot do.
This is all to say that while K-means remains a key member of our clustering toolbox,
it's also important to introduce
a couple more clustering algorithms that can be more appropriate in certain situations.
And that's what we'll start looking at in the next video.